(intro)=
# [Thinking like an institutional designer](thinking_link_an_inst_Design.md)

Network security, so the joke goes, is a hardware problem, not a software problem. All the problems stem from the wobbly bits in the chairs.
All though the joke clearly simplifies the matter, it does get one very important thing right. No matter what technical system you design, in the end, its impact on the world will depend on what those pesky humans do with it. This leaves a technical designer with two options: option 1, ignore the problem and hope it goes away; option 2, explicitly take into account that humans are part of the problem the system tries to solve. If we take the human part of the system seriously, the designer has to take into account the design of the rules, interactions, and transactions the system is supposed to enable. Designing a complex socio-technical or socio-economic system requires an institutional design. 

Institutional design can be done without reference to a specific technical system. The matching markets of schools and pupils, and organs and recipients, are also designed institutions. They are bundles of rules and rights that govern certain transactions. They tend to require a technical system to function. Nobody wants to do the matching of all pupils to all schools in a city by hand, nor can we wait for the national recipient list to be resorted for a particular organ by hand.  Technological systems enable these institutions to function, but the institutional design can be largely agnostic of its technical details. As long as the system works correctly, that is, it enables the correct transfer of information in a timely manner -- whether through Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or carrier pigeon[^1]  --, the required transfer of property rights – through code of law or through computer code[^2] --, and allows reliable and efficient decision-making – by voting or information markets[^3] --, it will work. 

Expecting that the system ‘works correctly’ creates technological constraints on the institutional design. Not every transaction is technically possible; I would love to tell my younger self some things about current stock prices. Similarly, the technical design faces institutional constraints. The intentions and behaviors of the users, as well as the institutional and legal context in which it is to be embedded, will affect the outcomes.  The technical constraints and institutional constraints together form the boundaries of the effective design space. A matching market for organs that is too slow, whether because of poor communication technologies or ineffective rules, will not work effectively and is thus poorly designed. 
[^1]: As described in _RFC 1149 - Standard for the transmission of IP datagrams on avian carriers_
[^2]: The remark ‘code as law’ that one hears in cryptocurrency circles is technically incorrect, yet one can analyze some cryptographic or code-based rights as property rights, see in particular the works by Mark Miller like Miller, M. S., Morningstar, C., & Frantz, B. (2001). Capability-based financial instruments. In Financial Cryptography: 4th International Conference, FC 2000 Anguilla, British West Indies, February 20–24, 2000 Proceedings 4 (pp. 349-378). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[^3]: Betting markets were (are) still very good ways to do polling in political races, should we skip polling? It is also used in a corporate setting, for instance around project Xanadu. See Hanson, R. (2007). The policy analysis market (a thwarted experiment in the use of prediction markets for public policy). Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 2(3), 73-88. for an introduction. 

When we apply an institutional design lens to a particular problem, designing the right transactions, information sharing, and coordination of behavior forms the focus of our analysis. We look at how we should set the rules so that we get desirable coordinated behavior from the users of the system. All within the constraints set by the institutional context, while assuming (or maybe designing) a technical system that works as expected.
To solve an institutional design problem, we do not look at physical functions that should be executed by the system, but at the (trans)actions we need to improve welfare. Once we know what transactions we want, we can design the rules, incentives, and other institutions that make them possible. This could be done by creating better new transactions (e.g. making corporations pay for greenhouse gas emissions), new decision rights (e.g. giving net operators the right to prioritize battery storage that relieves net congestion on the electric grid), or changing payment rules to incentivize better behavior from parties (e.g. pay the shipper for prisoners delivered to the destination, rather than for prisoners boarded at the start of the trip). 

In engineering design, it is sometimes said that designers should look for ’missing’ functions or missing objects. We do not advise the same for institutional design. There is an infinite number of potential property rights that can be traded with any number of legal and natural persons. Identifying all transactions that do not occur is, therefore, a waste of time. There are simply too many to list, and most do not exist for good reason. We are not, for instance, selling our children’s left kidneys. Technically, this transaction is possible; humans can live perfectly fine with one kidney; there is a demand for donor organs; parents are the legal guardians of their children and can thus enter into contracts in their name; furthermore, the children hold the largest possible claim on their own bodies, consistent with the legal definition of ownership. Hence, in the larger space of all potential transactions, this is a missing transaction. Yet, we would feel very uncomfortable designing this ‘missing market’ just because it is missing. It seems a very immoral market to create. 

A better approach is to look for ‘bad outcomes’. Bad outcomes, in this case, are all those situations where human behavior seems poorly coordinated, not well governed, or (not) involving transactions that should (not) happen. Examples are stalled decision procedures that should not be stalled (UN Security Council never sanctioned Russia for their special military operation in Ukraine); projects that are not implemented but would be welfare-improving (nuclear power could speed up the energy transition); transactions that we could probably do without (front running in stock markets scares off small investors), or transactions we probably should have but don’t (I do not need my access to the electricity grid 24h a day, why can I not sell parts of it to those people waiting for a connection?).

## From Functions to Transactions ##
In the design of technical systems, the system is often decomposed into functions (and sub-functions, and sub-functions of those functions..) to reduce complexity. The smaller functions are easier to design than the entire system and are a way to divide the larger task with a clear identification of interfaces and boundaries. To match the institutional design to the technical system, it helps to do a similar decomposition into smaller transactions and the governance structures that are required for those. A convenient way to do so is to look at the functional decomposition of the technical system and identify the functions that have (or should have) a social or institutional context. 

If we look at the electricity grid, the final part that enters the house is a connector just after the meter. The technical function of the connector is thus to ‘connect to the grid’. However, as a description of the function of the connector, this is somewhat unsatisfactory. What does it connect to the grid? Why is it located there? For whom is this connection meant? To get a good understanding of whether or not this function is fulfilled in a good way, we need to understand the institutional context. The connection is meant to allow the owners of the house to buy electricity through the grid. For the institutional design of this system, we add a social or institutional qualifier and create a socio-technical function. The socio-technical function of the connectors is to create a ‘Connect the owner’s private network to the public grid’. With this socio-technical function, we can start looking at transactions and property rights that are associated with this function. 

The grid managers maintain the balance on the net (a technical requirement), and to do so, they keep a tight watch on who has use rights (institutional solution) and how much power they can use (institutional solution plus technical enforcement through the fuse box). The right to connect to the network is a use-right that belongs to the grid managers, so it has to be obtained by the owner of the house. 

The grid connection is worth something to the owner of the house if and only if, they can actually use it to buy electricity. So the second associated transaction is the purchase of electricity. This transaction requires us to measure how much electricity goes through the line. This is information that has to be created and transacted with. We need a meter that is trusted by the owners and electricity company and the information has to be shared between these two, so property rights over this information have to be defined and transacted. In NL, the meter belongs to the grid operator, who can replace it if it is broken. This creates another institutional problem. The meter that belongs to the grid operator has a physical location in the house that belongs to the owners. Owners usually do not object since we like to have electricity and thus accept the technical requirements. However, given that a meter in my house does not belong to me,  we need a way to determine who is liable for an issue when this occurs in the future. By defining the property rights over the line, the connector, and the meter, we achieve just that. My responsibility as a homeowner starts at the exit port of the meter; I do not have the right to open any part of the network in or before the network without the prior permission of the grid manager (institutional solution to maintain the integrity of the system). Furthermore, the meter that I do not own creates information about my power use that is needed by me and my electricity company. So, part of the contract with the grid manager regulates that I have ownership rights over the generated information and can use that information to transact so that I can buy power from an electricity company. 
The discussion above is far from complete in terms of all institutional arrangements, but it should show a clear pattern. Even when the technical function ‘connect to the grid’ can be discussed in purely technical terms (Amps, Herz, line-thickness, efficiency loss,….), the socio-technical function ‘Connect the owner’s private network to the public grid’ requires a discussion in relation to the property rights, transactions, and institutions that form its institutional context. During the design of a socio-technical system, it, therefore, pays off to look at the functional decomposition and see where you should add social or institutional qualifiers. By definition, transactions occur when a property right crosses the interface between two entities. Therefore, you will generally find these qualifiers at or near the boundary of your system, near where the system interacts with its larger context. Note that it does not have to be the boundary per se; the meter and its information are within the system since they are before the connector, but it is a good rule of thumb to look for institutional constraints near interfaces and boundaries nonetheless. Furthermore, when things are created or destroyed, or when information is required and/or decisions are made, you will likely need to think about property rights and governance structures. 
